---
title: "Newsletter July 2024: Note Making Re-Visited"
date: 2024-08-01
tags: newsletter
---

July means vacation. Vacation means more time for recreational activities and
working on things I enjoy.

For the recreational part, I've spend a lot of time away from the computer. One
thing I've been doing quite a lot more is running. Here I am participating in a
trail race:

<center><p><img src="/writing/newsletter/july-2024/kolmarden.jpg"></p></center>

For the working on things I enjoy part, I've done some development on my note
taking application and practiced taking better notes. I also managed to finish
up an old blog post.

## Note Taking Application

In 2020 I read the book *How to Take Smart Notes* by SÃ¶nke Ahrens. It describes
a specific way to take notes with the intent to turn those notes into new
texts. I wanted a program that closely mimicked this method but couldn't find
one. So I set out to create my own. You can see a demo of it in this video that
I made in 2021:

<center>
<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Xh2bik1cOl0" title="YouTube video player"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write;
encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>

This month my interest for smart notes resurfaced. I use the program regularly,
but I find that I mostly collect notes, and don't do much with them. I read
more about the approach in the book and in articles I found online. And in my
own notes. I made some small improvements to my program to better support the
smart notes workflow. I made text rendering more pretty and added the ability
to color notes differently depending on the kind of note.

## Literate Programming

Then I thought I should practice actually producing some text from my notes.
One area of interest to me is literate programming. I started collecting notes
on the topic, organizing them in my program, reading more articles about
literate programming, and taking more notes. Here is a current snapshot:

<center><p><img
src="/writing/newsletter/july-2024/smartnotes.png"></p></center>

I though I would write a blog post about literate programming. So I started to
build a table of contents out of my different notes. But when I did that, I
found that I couldn't piece together a narrative. But I did find another
possible narrative that includes topics from literate programming.

I hope this process will eventually generate a few blog posts as output.

## One-File Programs

One idea that came from the literate programming research is what I call
one-file programs. I asked myself what makes programs easier to read and
understand. I though of these characteristics:

* Small: Fits in a single file

* Standalone: With as few dependencies as possible

* Custom for me: fork and make changes for yourself

I'm currently experimenting with writing such programs, and you can find the
repo here: [one-file-programs
repo](https://github.com/rickardlindberg/one-file-programs).

This style of programming is also inspired by [freewheeling
apps](https://akkartik.name/freewheeling/) that I wrote about in the [June
newsletter](/writing/newsletter/june-2024/index.html).

## Output Tracking vs Mocks

I also finished the blog post about [Output Tracking vs
Mocks](/writing/output-tracking-vs-mocks/index.html). I started writing it many
months ago, and then my motivation dropped, so I'm glad I managed to finish it.

As most of the times, writing about the topic helped me clarify my thinking
about it and I learned something new. That's the main reason that I write.

I also got some
[feedback](https://discord.com/channels/897648912851173408/1266778182934073365)
on Discord.

## Inventing on Principle

I re-watched parts of [Inventing on
Principle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PUv66718DII) by Bret Victor.

I was reminded that creators need to be able to see what they are doing without
any mental mapping.

That is why one problem with literate programming is the mental burden of
double compilation. You can't run your debugger on the literate source, so you
have to first compile it, and then do the mental mapping in the debugger.

This mental burden of course exists for regular programs as well. You have to
imagine what the source code instructions would do.

A live system, like Smalltalk, is better in this regard. I want to explore more
how to incorporate liveness in programming.
