---
title: Organizing information on a wiki
---
In this post I explain how I used a wiki to organize ideas about an
[application I'm
developing](/writing/reflections-on-programming/2012-01-11-application-development-series-intro/index.html).
I used the wiki on
[GitHub](https://github.com/rickardlindberg/orgapp/wiki).

Process
-------

I started by entering all ideas on the start page of the wiki: I
listened to recorded ideas and transcribed them, I scanned sketches, and
I transfered notes from paper.

Following this was a process of refactoring: I looked for similar ideas
and extracted those to new pages with descriptive names. I kept going
until the start page only contained an introduction and a bullet list
with links to the extracted pages.

As I have had new ideas, I've added them to the appropriate page.

Refactoring problem
-------------------

One reason that I tried using a wiki is that I believe it's a good tool
for organizing information. I expected it to be easy to move a piece of
text from one place to another. (This is important to be able to do
because you rarely find the right place the first time.)

But I noticed that extracting pages was quite tedious: first I had to
edit the start page, cut the text that I wanted to move, create a new
page, give it a title, paste the text from the start page, save the new
page, and save the start page.

Better refactoring support
--------------------------

A wiki that seems to have a better solution to this problem is Ward
Cunningham's [smallest federated
wiki](http://github.com/WardCunningham/Smallest-Federated-Wiki). A
[screencast](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tYrLwlxOKmA) shows how you
can drag a paragraph and drop it on another page. And that's it. You're
done.

I think that your behaviour will change if you have this refactoring
support. Because it's easier and faster to organize information, I think
you will end up with a better organized wiki in less time.

You can also argue that if refactoring is is easy and fun, you will
spend more time doing it than what is actually worth. I think I would
still want the feature though.
