---
title: What Is Programming?
date: 2021-09-14
---

This weekend I completed a short movie about what programming is like for me.
You can watch it below. This post presents behind the scenes thoughts that I
would like to record.

<p><center>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jYvMbSTvns8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center></p>

First of all, I'm still experimenting with the video format. I kind of enjoy
the process of shooting and editing, but I am a total beginner, so that is why
I would like to learn more.

I don't have any goals with my movies right now. I just want to get better at
the craft by making various movies and see where it takes me.

This movie about programming was the first one that I planned more carefully
and also wrote a script for before I started recording. I found that helpful.
Especially to plan the clips to use ahead of time. So for example, I shot the
first clip and the last clip at the same time, but used them far apart in the
final movie. My script lacked many details, so i had to improvise in the
editing process. Therefore I think I would benefit from having more detailed
scripts.

I was also quite hesitant to publish the movie as it was. I felt like I needed
to spend more time in editing. Add more music. Get better shots illustrating my
points in the voice over. Then I decided that it would cost too much in terms
of time, and it would only increase the quality by a little. I had kind of set
a goal to complete the movie in one day (with some planning done before that).
I had already spent half an additional day to get the editing sort of cohesive.
I decided that my skills are not better now. If I am to make a movie in a day,
this is how good I can make it. And the fastest way to improve is to make more
movies instead of striving for perfection in every single movie. So that is
what I did. I just published it.  And now I am free to work on the next movie
bringing all experiences from this movie into the next one. I have no idea what
it will be about. But I have a notebook with ideas.
